# ASTRA-LEO Firmware

Repository for firmware development of ASTRA-LEO.

This code will run on the main controller (Microchip samv71q21b), and will collect data from the readout electronics, process it, and supply it to the satellite bus.

## Dependencies

> [!NOTE]
> The arm-none-eabi toolchain from some system package managers is broken.
> I got some errors regarding PRIu64 and similar on the version distributed by apt (13.2.1)
> I recommend downloading the [official release from arm](https://developer.arm.com/downloads/-/arm-gnu-toolchain-downloads/)
> I was able to use the version from the Arch package repository (pacman) which was version (14.2.0)

- Build System
  - cmake
  - Ninja

- Compiler, debugger and utilities for running on embedded target (ARM)
  - openocd or JLinkGDBServer
  - arm-none-eabi-gcc
  - arm-none-eabi-binutils
  - arm-none-eabi-newlib
  - arm-none-eabi-gdb or gdb-multiarch

- Compiler, debugger and utilities for simulating on host (Linux) (Most of these are probably already installed on your system).
  - gcc
  - gdb
  - binutils
  - libc-dev

- Development tools
  - clang-format

- Software dependencies (automatically fetched by cmake)
  - FreeRTOS
  - FreeRTOS + Trace ([Percepio TraceRecorder](https://github.com/percepio/TraceRecorderSource/tree/main))
  - CSP
  - libparam

## Usage

Some custom presets are configured in [CMakePresets.json](./CMakePresets.json).
You can also add your own presets in a CMakeUserPresets.json file.

To compile using the presets (in this case samv71_dk-debug), run

```bash
cmake --preset samv71_dk-debug
cmake --build --preset samv71_dk-debug
```

> [!TIP]
> Use a cmake extension in your editor to integrate presets as well as other build settings

### Linux Tools and simulation

If you wanna simulate on Linux, you just have to find the executable and run it. The executables are located in the build folder generated by cmake eg. `./build/posix-debug/src/platform/posix/main`.

The Linux targets also have tracing enabled, however because of how the POSIX port for FreeRTOS works, the resource usage analysis will not be accurate.

The dummy payload controller acts as a CSP server for the ASTRA-LEO to connect to.
This can be used both with an embedded device as the ASTRA-LEO or the Linux based simulator.
You must specify what ethernet interface on the computer shall be used.

```bash
./dummy_payload_controller -e eth1
```

For the Linux programs, you must give them permission to use raw sockets.
This can be achieved by running the command

```bash
sudo setcap cap_net_raw+ep /path/to/executable
```

This Instruction will also be given at runtime.

If you wanna connect the simulated ASTRA-LEO to the dummy payload controller (both running on Linux),
you must set up two virtual ethernet interfaces that are connected.
This can be achieved with

```bash
sudo ip link add veth0 type veth peer name veth1
sudo ip link set veth0 up
sudo ip link set veth1 up
```

By default the simulated ASTRA-LEO uses the ethernet interface veth0.
This means that whatever service you want to connect to the ASTRA-LEO (probably the dummy payload controller or CSH) has to use veth1.

If you want to connect a simulated version of ASTRA-LEO to the flatsat via the ethernet port on your PC, you need to edit the source code
such that the simulated ASTRA-LEO will use the correct ethernet interface. This is specified [here](./src/platform/posix/main.c).

### Running on SAMV71

For running/debugging on the embedded target, first use OpenOCD:

```bash
openocd -f interface/cmsis-dap.cfg -f target/atsamv.cfg
```

Or JLinkGDBServer if you are using a JLink:

```bash
JLinkGDBServer -device ATSAMV71Q21 -if SWD -speed 1800
```

Then run gdb:

```bash
arm-none-eabi-gdb -x gdb/openocd.gdb build/samv71_dk-debug/src/platform/samv71q21b/astra_leo_fw.elf
```

or

```bash
arm-none-eabi-gdb -x gdb/jlink.gdb build/samv71_dk-debug/src/platform/samv71q21b/astra_leo_fw.elf
```

depending on if you're using openocd or JLink.

In gdb, run `load` to flash the firmware.
Now you can start debugging

The [GDB Script](./gdb/openocd.gdb) automatically connects to the OpenOCD instance and also defines some commands to aid in debugging and analysis.
For example, `tracedump` automatically saves a .bin file with FreeRTOS Trace data that can be analyzed with Percepio View (free version) or Tracealyzer (requires license).

If you just want to flash the firmware, there probably easier ways to do it.
For example using a dedicated flashing utility. (I have not tried that though)

You can also use the [VSCode Cortex-Debug extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=marus25.cortex-debug). for debugging.

## CSH

For instructions on how to use spaceinventors CSH, click (here)[./csh/README.md]

## FreeRTOS Tracing with Tracealyzer

The project can generate tracing data that can be analyzed with Percepio Tracealyzer.
Currently it is configured to use the RingBuffer streamport, which means that the tracing data is stored in a ringbuffer in RAM on the device.
The included [GDB Script](./gdb/openocd.gdb) defines a command to save the tracing data to a file which can be opened in Tracealyzer.

It is also possible to use other streamports which will allow for unlimited streaming of data (and not be limited to the size of the ringbuffer.
Some options are

- TCP (this requires adding a full TCP/IP stack)
- USB (this requires making a USB CDC driver for tracealyzer because only STM32 is currently supported by default)
- RTT (this requires using a debugger that supports Segger RTT protocol (any Segger JLink))

## Development

Remember to configure clang-format to make sure the code is properly formatted before committing
